https://federalregister.gov/a/04-17097

Homeless Management Information Systems (HMIS); Data and Technical Standards Final Notice
A Notice by the Housing and Urban Development Department on 07/30/2004

https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2004/07/30/04-17097/homeless-management-information-systems-hmis-data-and-technical-standards-final-notice#h-83

4. HMIS Privacy and Security Standards

This section of the Notice describes standards for the privacy and security of personal information collected and stored in an HMIS. The standards seek to protect the confidentiality of personal information while allowing for reasonable, responsible, and limited uses and disclosures of data. These privacy and security standards are based on principles of fair information practices and on security standards recognized by the information privacy and technology communities. The standards were developed after careful review of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) standards for securing and protecting patient information. Given the importance of ensuring data confidentiality, HUD intends to provide training and technical assistance for its grantees on this topic.
The section defines baseline standards that will be required of any organization (such as a Continuum of Care, homeless assistance provider, or HMIS software company) that records, uses, or processes PPI on homeless clients for an HMIS. This section also identifies additional protocols or policies that organizations may chooseto adopt to enhance further the privacy and security of information collected through HMIS. Organizations are encouraged to apply these additional protections to protect client information as they deem appropriate. They must also comply with federal, state and local laws that require additional confidentiality protections.
This two-tiered approach recognizes the broad diversity of organizations that participate in HMIS and the differing programmatic and organizational realities that may demand a higher standard for some activities. Some organizations (e.g., such as those serving victims of domestic violence) may choose to implement higher levels of privacy and security standards because of the nature of their homeless population and/or service provision. Others (e.g., large emergency shelters) may find the higher standards overly burdensome or impractical. At a minimum, however, all organizations must meet the baseline privacy and security requirements described in this section. This approach provides a uniform floor of protection for homeless clients with the possibility of additional protections for organizations with additional needs or capacities.
Sections 4.1 and 4.2 discuss HMIS privacy standards. Section 4.3 discusses security standards.

4.1. HMIS Privacy Standards: Definitions and Scope

4.1.1. Definition of Terms

1. Protected Personal Information (PPI). Any information maintained by or for a Covered Homeless Organization about a living homeless client or homeless individual that: (1) Identifies, either directly or indirectly, a specific individual; (2) can be manipulated by a reasonably foreseeable method to identify a specific individual; or (3) can be linked with other available information to identify a specific individual.
2. Covered Homeless Organization (CHO). Any organization (including its employees, volunteers, affiliates, contractors, and associates) that records, uses or processes PPI on homeless clients for an HMIS.
3. Processing. Any operation or set of operations performed on PPI, whether or not by automated means, including but not limited to collection, maintenance, use, disclosure, transmission and destruction of the information.
4. HMIS Uses and Disclosures. The uses and disclosures of PPI that are allowed by these standards.
4.1.2.Applying the HMIS Privacy and Security Standards

These privacy standards apply to any homeless assistance organization that records, uses or processes protected personal information (PPI) for an HMIS. A provider that meets this definition is referred to as a covered homeless organization (CHO). All PPI maintained by a CHO is subject to these standards.
Any CHO that is covered under the HIPAA is not required to comply with the privacy or security standards in this Notice if the CHO determines that a substantial portion of its PPI about homeless clients or homeless individuals is protected health information as defined in the HIPAA rules. Exempting HIPAA covered entities from the HMIS privacy and security rules avoids all possible conflicts between the two sets of rules. The HMIS standards give precedence to the HIPAA privacy and security rules because: (1) The HIPAA rules are more finely attuned to the requirements of the health care system; (2) the HIPAA rules provide important privacy and security protections for protected health information; and (3) requiring a homeless provider to comply with or reconcile two sets of rules would be an unreasonable burden.
It is possible that part of a homeless organization's operations may be covered by the HMIS standards while another part is covered by the HIPAA standards. A CHO that, because of organizational structure, legal requirement, or other reason, maintains personal information about a homeless client that does not fall under the privacy and security standards in this section (e.g., the information is subject to the HIPAA health privacy rule) must describe that information in its privacy notice and explain the reason the information is not covered. The purpose of the disclosure requirement is to avoid giving the impression that all personal information will be protected under the HMIS standards if other standards or if no standards apply.
4.1.3. Allowable HMIS Uses and Disclosures of Protected Personal Information (PPI)

A CHO may use or disclose PPI from an HMIS under the following circumstances: (1) To provide or coordinate services to an individual; (2) for functions related to payment or reimbursement for services; (3) to carry out administrative functions, including but not limited to legal, audit, personnel, oversight and management functions; or (4) for creating de-identified PPI.
CHOs, like other institutions that maintain personal information about individuals, have obligations that may transcend the privacy interests of clients. The following additional uses and disclosures recognize those obligations to use or share personal information by balancing competing interests in a responsible and limited way. Under the HMIS privacy standard, these additional uses and disclosures are permissive and not mandatory (except for first party access to information and any required disclosures for oversight of compliance with HMIS privacy and security standards). However, nothing in this standard modifies an obligation under applicable law to use or disclose personal information.
Uses and disclosures required by law. A CHO may use or disclose PPI when required by law to the extent that the use or disclosure complies with and is limited to the requirements of the law.
Uses and disclosures to avert a serious threat to health or safety. A CHO may, consistent with applicable law and standards of ethical conduct, use or disclose PPI if: (1) The CHO, in good faith, believes the use or disclosure is necessary to prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of an individual or the public; and (2) the use or disclosure is made to a person reasonably able to prevent or lessen the threat, including the target of the threat.
Uses and disclosures about victims of abuse, neglect or domestic violence. A CHO may disclose PPI about an individual whom the CHO reasonably believes to be a victim of abuse, neglect or domestic violence to a government authority (including a social service or protective services agency) authorized by law to receive reports of abuse, neglect or domestic violence under any of the following circumstances:
Where the disclosure is required by law and the disclosure complies with and is limited to the requirements of the law;
If the individual agrees to the disclosure; or
To the extent that the disclosure is expressly authorized by statute or regulation; and the CHO believes the disclosure is necessary to prevent serious harm to the individual or other potential victims; or if the individual is unable to agree because of incapacity, a law enforcement or other public official authorized to receive the report represents that the PPI for which disclosure is sought is not intended to be used against the individual and that an immediate enforcement activity that depends upon the disclosure would bematerially and adversely affected by waiting until the individual is able to agree to the disclosure.
A CHO that makes a permitted disclosure about victims of abuse, neglect or domestic violence must promptly inform the individual that a disclosure has been or will be made, except if:
The CHO, in the exercise of professional judgment, believes informing the individual would place the individual at risk of serious harm; or
The CHO would be informing a personal representative (such as a family member or friend), and the CHO reasonably believes the personal representative is responsible for the abuse, neglect or other injury, and that informing the personal representative would not be in the best interests of the individual as determined by the CHO, in the exercise of professional judgment.
Uses and disclosures for academic research purposes. A CHO may use or disclose PPI for academic research conducted by an individual or institution that has a formal relationship with the CHO if the research is conducted either:
By an individual employed by or affiliated with the organization for use in a research project conducted under a written research agreement approved in writing by a program administrator (other than the individual conducting the research) designated by the CHO; or
By an institution for use in a research project conducted under a written research agreement approved in writing by a program administrator designated by the CHO.
A written research agreement must: (1) Establish rules and limitations for the processing and security of PPI in the course of the research; (2) provide for the return or proper disposal of all PPI at the conclusion of the research; (3) restrict additional use or disclosure of PPI, except where required by law; and (4) require that the recipient of data formally agree to comply with all terms and conditions of the agreement.
A written research agreement is not a substitute for approval of a research project by an Institutional Review Board, Privacy Board or other applicable human subjects protection institution.
Disclosures for law enforcement purposes. A CHO may, consistent with applicable law and standards of ethical conduct, disclose PPI for a law enforcement purpose to a law enforcement official under any of the following circumstances:
In response to a lawful court order, court-ordered warrant, subpoena or summons issued by a judicial officer, or a grand jury subpoena;
If the law enforcement official makes a written request for protected personal information that: (1) Is signed by a supervisory official of the law enforcement agency seeking the PPI; (2) states that the information is relevant and material to a legitimate law enforcement investigation; (3) identifies the PPI sought; (4) is specific and limited in scope to the extent reasonably practicable in light of the purpose for which the information is sought; and (5) states that de-identified information could not be used to accomplish the purpose of the disclosure.
If the CHO believes in good faith that the PPI constitutes evidence of criminal conduct that occurred on the premises of the CHO;
In response to an oral request for the purpose of identifying or locating a suspect, fugitive, material witness or missing person and the PPI disclosed consists only of name, address, date of birth, place of birth, Social Security Number, and distinguishing physical characteristics; or
If (1) the official is an authorized federal official seeking PPI for the provision of protective services to the President or other persons authorized by 18 U.S.C. 3056, or to foreign heads of state or other persons authorized by 22 U.S.C. 2709(a)(3), or for the conduct of investigations authorized by 18 U.S.C. 871 and 879 (threats against the President and others); and (2) the information requested is specific and limited in scope to the extent reasonably practicable in light of the purpose for which the information is sought.
4.2. Privacy Requirements

All CHOs must comply with the baseline privacy requirements described here with respect to: data collection limitations; data quality; purpose and use limitations; openness; access and correction; and accountability. A CHO may adopt additional substantive and procedural privacy protections that exceed the baseline requirements for each of these areas. A CHO must comply with federal, state and local laws that require additional confidentiality protections. All additional protections must be described in the CHO's privacy notice. A CHO must comply with all baseline privacy protections and with all additional privacy protections included in its privacy notice.
A CHO may maintain a common data storage medium with another organization (including but not limited to another CHO) that includes the sharing of PPI. When PPI is shared between organizations, responsibilities for privacy and security may reasonably be allocated between the organizations. Organizations sharing a common data storage medium and PPI may adopt differing privacy and security policies as they deem appropriate, administratively feasible, and consistent with these HMIS privacy and security standards, as long as these privacy and security policies allow for the unduplication of homeless clients at the CoC level.
4.2.1. Collection Limitation

Baseline requirement. A CHO may collect PPI only when appropriate to the purposes for which the information is obtained or when required by law. A CHO must collect PPI by lawful and fair means and, where appropriate, with the knowledge or consent of the individual.
A CHO must post a sign at each intake desk (or comparable location) that explains generally the reasons for collecting this information. Consent of the individual for data collection may be inferred from the circumstances of the collection. Providers may use the following language to meet this standard: “We collect personal information directly from you for reasons that are discussed in our privacy statement. We may be required to collect some personal information by law or by organizations that give us money to operate this program. Other personal information that we collect is important to run our programs, to improve services for homeless persons, and to better understand the needs of homeless persons. We only collect information that we consider to be appropriate.”
Additional Privacy Protections. A CHO may, in its privacy notice, commit itself to additional privacy protections consistent with HMIS requirements, including, but not limited to:
(1) Restricting collection of personal data, other than required HMIS data elements;
(2) Collecting PPI only with the express knowledge or consent of the individual (unless required by law); and
(3) Obtaining oral or written consent from the individual for the collection of personal information from the individual or from a third party.
4.2.2. Data Quality

Baseline Requirement. PPI collected by a CHO must be relevant to the purpose for which it is to be used. To the extent necessary for those purposes, PPI should be accurate, complete and timely.
A CHO must develop and implement a plan to dispose of or, in the alternative, to remove identifiers from, PPI that is not in current use seven years after the PPI was created or last changed(unless a statutory, regulatory, contractual, or other requirement mandates longer retention). Standards for destroying information are provided in Section 4.3.
4.2.3. Purpose Specification and Use Limitation

Baseline Requirement. A CHO must specify in its privacy notice the purposes for which it collects PPI and must describe all uses and disclosures. A CHO may use or disclose PPI only if the use or disclosure is allowed by this standard and is described in its privacy notice. A CHO may infer consent for all uses and disclosures specified in the notice and for uses and disclosures determined by the CHO to be compatible with those specified in the notice.
Except for first party access to information and any required disclosures for oversight of compliance with HMIS privacy and security standards, all uses and disclosures are permissive and not mandatory. Uses and disclosures not specified in the privacy notice can be made only with the consent of the individual or when required by law.
Additional Privacy Protections. A CHO may, in its privacy notice, commit itself to additional privacy protections consistent with HMIS requirements, including, but not limited to:
(1) Seeking either oral or written consent for some or all processing when individual consent for a use, disclosure or other form of processing is appropriate;
(2) Agreeing to additional restrictions on use or disclosure of an individual's PPI at the request of the individual if the request is reasonable. The CHO is bound by the agreement, except if inconsistent with legal requirements;
(3) Limiting uses and disclosures to those specified in its privacy notice and to other uses and disclosures that are necessary for those specified;
(4) Committing that PPI may not be disclosed directly or indirectly to any government agency (including a contractor or grantee of an agency) for inclusion in any national homeless database that contains personal protected information unless required by statute;
(5) Committing to maintain an audit trail containing the date, purpose and recipient of some or all disclosures of PPI;
(6) Committing to make audit trails of disclosures available to the homeless individual; and
(7) Limiting disclosures of PPI to the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the disclosure.
4.2.4. Openness

Baseline Requirement. A CHO must publish a privacy notice describing its polices and practices for the processing of PPI and must provide a copy of its privacy notice to any individual upon request. If a CHO maintains a public web page, the CHO must post the current version of its privacy notice on the web page. A CHO may, if appropriate, omit its street address from its privacy notice. A CHO must post a sign stating the availability of its privacy notice to any individual who requests a copy.
A CHO must state in its privacy notice that the policy may be amended at any time and that amendments may affect information obtained by the CHO before the date of the change. An amendment to the privacy notice regarding use or disclosure will be effective with respect to information processed before the amendment, unless otherwise stated. All amendments to the privacy notice must be consistent with the requirements of these privacy standards. A CHO must maintain permanent documentation of all privacy notice amendments.
CHOs are reminded that they are obligated to provide reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities throughout the data collection process. This may include but is not limited to, providing qualified sign language interpreters, readers or materials in accessible formats such as Braille, audio, or large type, as needed by the individual with a disability. See 24 CFR 8.6; 28 CFR 36.303. Note: This obligation does not apply to CHOs who do not receive federal financial assistance and who are also exempt from the requirements of Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act because they qualify as “religious entities” under that Act.
In addition, CHOs that are recipients of federal financial assistance shall provide required information in languages other than English that are common in the community, if speakers of these languages are found in significant numbers and come into frequent contact with the program. See HUD Limited English Proficiency Recipient Guidance published on December 18, 2003 (68 FR 70968).
Additional Privacy Protections. A CHO may, in its privacy notice, commit itself to additional privacy protections consistent with HMIS requirements, including, but not limited to:
(1) making a reasonable effort to offer a copy of the privacy notice to each client at or around the time of data collection or at another appropriate time;
(2) giving a copy of its privacy notice to each client on or about the time of first data collection. If the first contact is over the telephone, the privacy notice may be provided at the first in-person contact (or by mail, if requested); and/or
(3) adopting a policy for changing its privacy notice that includes advance notice of the change, consideration of public comments, and prospective application of changes.
4.2.5. Access and Correction

Baseline Requirement. In general, a CHO must allow an individual to inspect and to have a copy of any PPI about the individual. A CHO must offer to explain any information that the individual may not understand.
A CHO must consider any request by an individual for correction of inaccurate or incomplete PPI pertaining to the individual. A CHO is not required to remove any information but may, in the alternative, mark information as inaccurate or incomplete and may supplement it with additional information.
In its privacy notice, a CHO may reserve the ability to rely on the following reasons for denying an individual inspection or copying of the individual's PPI:
(1) Information compiled in reasonable anticipation of litigation or comparable proceedings;
(2) information about another individual (other than a health care or homeless provider);
(3) information obtained under a promise of confidentiality (other than a promise from a health care or homeless provider) if disclosure would reveal the source of the information; or
(4) information, the disclosure of which would be reasonably likely to endanger the life or physical safety of any individual.
A CHO can reject repeated or harassing requests for access or correction. A CHO that denies an individual's request for access or correction must explain the reason for the denial to the individual and must include documentation of the request and the reason for the denial as part of the protected personal information about the individual.
Additional Privacy Protections. A CHO may, in its privacy notice, commit itself to additional privacy protections consistent with HMIS requirements, including, but not limited to:
(1) Accepting an appeal of a denial of access or correction by adopting its ownappeal procedure and describing the procedure in its privacy notice;
(2) Limiting the grounds for denial of access by not stating a recognized basis for denial in its privacy notice;
(3) Allowing an individual whose request for correction has been denied to add to the individual's information a concise statement of disagreement. A CHO may agree to disclose the statement of disagreement whenever it discloses the disputed PPI to another person. These procedures must be described in the CHO's privacy notice; and/or
(4) Providing to an individual a written explanation of the reason for a denial of an individual's request for access or correction.
4.2.6. Accountability

Baseline Requirement. A CHO must establish a procedure for accepting and considering questions or complaints about its privacy and security policies and practices. A CHO must require each member of its staff (including employees, volunteers, affiliates, contractors and associates) to sign (annually or otherwise) a confidentiality agreement that acknowledges receipt of a copy of the privacy notice and that pledges to comply with the privacy notice.
Additional Privacy Protections. A CHO may, in its privacy notice, commit itself to additional privacy protections consistent with HMIS requirements, including, but not limited to:
(1) Requiring each member of its staff (including employees, volunteers, affiliates, contractors and associates) to undergo (annually or otherwise) formal training in privacy requirements;
(2) Establishing a method, such as an internal audit, for regularly reviewing compliance with its privacy policy;
(3) Establishing an internal or external appeal process for hearing an appeal of a privacy complaint or an appeal of a denial of access or correction rights; and/or
(4) Designating a chief privacy officer to supervise implementation of the CHO's privacy standards.
4.3. Security Standards

This section describes the standards for system, application and hard copy security. All CHOs must comply with the baseline security requirements. A CHO may adopt additional security protections that exceed the baseline requirements if it chooses.
4.3.1. System Security

Applicability. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must apply system security provisions to all the systems where personal protected information is stored, including, but not limited to, a CHO's networks, desktops, laptops, mini-computers, mainframes and servers.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by applying system security provisions to all electronic and hard copy information that is not collected specifically for the HMIS. A CHO may also seek an outside organization to perform an internal security audit and certify system security.
User Authentication. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must secure HMIS systems with, at a minimum, a user authentication system consisting of a username and a password. Passwords must be at least eight characters long and meet reasonable industry standard requirements. These requirements include, but are not limited to:
(1) Using at least one number and one letter;
(2) Not using, or including, the username, the HMIS name, or the HMIS vendor's name; and/or
(3) Not consisting entirely of any word found in the common dictionary or any of the above spelled backwards.
Using default passwords on initial entry into the HMIS application is allowed so long as the application requires that the default password be changed on first use. Written information specifically pertaining to user access (e.g., username and password) may not be stored or displayed in any publicly accessible location. Individual users must not be able to log on to more than one workstation at a time, or be able to log on to the network at more than one location at a time.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by including one of each of the following kinds of characters in the password:
(1) upper and lower-case letters;
(2) numbers; and/or
(3) symbols.
A common solution to creating complex passwords is to use phrases instead of individual words as passwords, capitalize each new word in the phrase, and substitute numbers and symbols for letters in any given word. For example, the phrase “secure password” can be modified to “$3cur3P@$$w0rd” by replacing the letter “s” with “$,” the letter “e” with the number “3,” the letter “a” with “@” and the letter “o” with the number “0,” and eliminating spaces between words.
Virus Protection. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must protect HMIS systems from viruses by using commercially available virus protection software. Virus protection must include automated scanning of files as they are accessed by users on the system where the HMIS application is housed. A CHO must regularly update virus definitions from the software vendor.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by automatically scanning all files for viruses when the system is turned on, shut down or not actively being used.
Firewalls. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must protect HMIS systems from malicious intrusion behind a secure firewall. Each individual workstation does not need its own firewall, as long as there is a firewall between that workstation and any systems, including the Internet and other computer networks, located outside of the organization. For example, a workstation that accesses the Internet through a modem would need its own firewall. A workstation that accesses the Internet through a central server would not need a firewall as long as the server has a firewall. Firewalls are commonly included with all new operating systems. Older operating systems can be equipped with secure firewalls that are available both commercially and for free on the Internet.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by applying a firewall to all HMIS workstations and systems.
Public Access. Baseline Requirement. HMIS that use public forums for data collection or reporting must be secured to allow only connections from previously approved computers and systems through Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificates, or extranets that limit access based on the Internet Provider (IP) address, or similar means. A public forum includes systems with public access to any part of the computer through the Internet, modems, bulletin boards, public kiosks or similar arenas. Further information on these tools can be found in the HMIS Consumer Guide and the HMIS Implementation Guide, both available on HUD's Web site.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by using PKI certificates and extranets that limit access based on the IP address. A very secure system would not house anyHMIS data on systems that are accessible to the general public.
Physical Access to Systems With Access to HMIS Data. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must staff computers stationed in public areas that are used to collect and store HMIS data at all times. When workstations are not in use and staff are not present, steps should be taken to ensure that the computers and data are secure and not usable by unauthorized individuals. After a short amount of time, workstations should automatically turn on a password protected screen saver when the workstation is temporarily not in use. Password protected screen savers are a standard feature with most operating systems and the amount of time can be regulated by a CHO. If staff from a CHO will be gone for an extended period of time, staff should log off the data entry system and shut down the computer.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by automatically logging users off of the HMIS application after a period of inactivity and automatically logging users off of the system after a period of inactivity. Most server operating systems come equipped with the needed software to automatically perform these functions. If staff from a CHO will be gone for an extended period of time, staff should store the computer and data in a locked room.
Disaster Protection and Recovery. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must copy all HMIS data on a regular basis to another medium (e.g., tape) and store it in a secure off-site location where the required privacy and security standards would also apply. A CHO that stores data in a central server, mini-computer or mainframe must store the central server, mini-computer or mainframe in a secure room with appropriate temperature control and fire suppression systems. Surge suppressors must be used to protect systems used for collecting and storing all the HMIS data.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by providing, among other options, fire and water protection at the off-site location that houses the storage medium. A CHO may also seek an outside organization to conduct a disaster protection audit.
Disposal. Baseline Requirement. In order to delete all HMIS data from a data storage medium, a covered homeless organization must reformat the storage medium. A CHO should reformat the storage medium more than once before reusing or disposing the medium.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by destroying media at a bonded vendor to ensure all the HMIS data is completely destroyed.
System Monitoring. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must use appropriate methods to monitor security systems. Systems that have access to any HMIS data must maintain a user access log. Many new operating systems and web servers are equipped with access logs and some allow the computer to email the log information to a designated user, usually a system administrator. Logs must be checked routinely.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by checking user access logs routinely for inappropriate access, hardware and software problems, errors and viruses, or purchasing one of several software applications available that track the status of individual files on computers. These applications are used to make sure that files are not being changed when they are not supposed to be. The applications inform the system administrator if a computer has been hacked, infected with a virus, has been restarted, or if the data files have been tampered with.
4.3.2. Application Security

These provisions apply to how all the HMIS data are secured by the HMIS application software.
Applicability. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must apply application security provisions to the software during data entry, storage and review or any other processing function.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements as needed.
User Authentication. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must secure all electronic HMIS data with, at a minimum, a user authentication system consisting of a username and a password. Passwords must be at least eight characters long and meet reasonable industry standard requirements. These requirements include, but are not limited to:
(1) Using at least one number and one letter;
(2) Using default passwords on initial entry into the HMIS application is allowed so long as the application requires that the default password be changed on first use;
(3) Not using, or including, the username, the HMIS name, or the HMIS vendor's name; and
(4) Not consisting entirely of any word found in the common dictionary or any of the above spelled backwards.
Written information specifically pertaining to user access (e.g., username and password) may not be stored or displayed in any publicly accessible location. Individual users should not be able to log on to more than one workstation at a time, or be able to log on to the network at more than one location at a time.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by including one of each of the following kinds of characters in the password:
(1) Upper and lower-case letters;
(2) Numbers; and
(3) Symbols.
A common solution to creating complex passwords is to use phrases instead of individual words as passwords, capitalize each new word in the phrase and substitute numbers and symbols for letters in any given word. For example, the phrase “secure password” can be modified to “$3cur3P@$$w0rd” by replacing the letter “s” with “$,” the letter “e” with the number “3,” the letter “a” with “@” and the letter “o” with the number “0,” and eliminating spaces between words.
Electronic Data Transmission. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must encrypt all HMIS data that are electronically transmitted over the Internet, publicly accessible networks or phone lines to current industry standards. The current standard is 128-bit encryption. Unencrypted data may be transmitted over secure direct connections between two systems. A secure direct connection is one that can only be accessed by users who have been authenticated on at least one of the systems involved and does not utilize any tertiary systems to transmit the data. A secure network would have secure direct connections.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by using PKI certificates to verify the workstations involved in the electronic data transmission, and by restricting access between the workstations using IP addresses. A very secure system would not transmit any protected information over a public system like the Internet.
Electronic Data Storage. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must store all HMIS data in a binary, not text, format. A CHO that uses one of several commonapplications (e.g., Microsoft Access, Microsoft SQL Server and Oracle) are already storing data in binary format and no other steps need to be taken.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by requiring that all PPI be stored in an encrypted format using at least the current industry standard. The current standard is a 128-bit key.
4.3.3. Hard Copy Security

This section provides standards for securing hard copy data.
Applicability. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must secure any paper or other hard copy containing personal protected information that is either generated by or for HMIS, including, but not limited to reports, data entry forms and signed consent forms.
Additional Security Protections. A CHO may commit itself to additional security protections consistent with HMIS requirements by applying hard copy security provisions to paper and hard copy information that is not collected specifically for the HMIS.
Security. Baseline Requirement. A CHO must supervise at all times any paper or other hard copy generated by or for HMIS that contains PPI when the hard copy is in a public area. When CHO staff are not present, the information must be secured in areas that are not publicly accessible.
Written information specifically pertaining to user access (e.g., username and password) must not be stored or displayed in any publicly accessible location.